four three two and boom that's a nice
hat I've told you ready but alive I
gotta tell you that's a nice it's it's
very kind of Indiana Jones but it's not
quite that it's like yeah that's Chi
you're like in the middle of it yeah
yeah dancing on the edge well I have a
really fat head and so there's his
website called like big heads calm
there's a website a total website for my
friend Bert Kreischer I had then put his
hat on I couldn't believe how big his
head was there was like an inch gap yeah
so if you know your head your head size
do you know your head size no I do not
so so it turns out if you know your head
size that that number comes from
somewhere I tell you what it is
sure so if you measure the circumference
of your head just get a tape measure
like you're measuring your waistline but
do it around your head and take that
number divide it by pi then that's your
hat size whoa yeah just seems
complicated is what it is right just why
I can't just be the circumference right
so what it turns out to be so what that
means is if you're dividing by PI you're
getting the the diameter of the circle
that has the same dimension as the
circumference of your head so if you
have an oblong head then what's doing is
finding out what the circle is the
diameter of the circle that has that
same circumference as your head oh okay
that's what that's doing for whatever
without whether that helps the Hat the
Hat maker so immediately I start
thinking about dan Aykroyd and SIA it
live as a conehead Oh with an idiot a
tall hat yeah so dude average eye you
still doing stand-up that's great
constantly loving it yeah and I caught
you a few months ago you were M seeing
some MMA was it what was well I'm always
doing that yeah stated shape because I'm
a fat slob right you are ripped back in
the day man
I tried it's not that I don't have the
energy to it's it's trying to find the
chance you back in the day look at you
shredding how much the way back then go
on 176 no no no I'm six-two so I'm 190
pounds in that Oh exactly I have big
thighs and stuff other wrestlers would
have skinnier thighs and things so I was
also taller than anyone I wrestled so
since we're the same height it meant
they had bigger muscles actually so cuz
were the same way right but I'm did I
say that right I'm taller right but were
the same weight so that means they have
bigger muscles right because none of us
have fat right so I had to do things
that my lank eNOS would enable me to do
and to accomplish that they couldn't so
I have long reach you know this sort of
a scoop an ankle that kind of thing
there's great advantages to having long
limbs in martial arts particularly in
wrestling grappling because of leverage
yeah also if you're quick and with long
Linda and I was both but if they got me
in their grip it was hard for me to get
out so what kind of exercise do you do
these days no I'm trying I you know I
guess yeah I'm trying I'm trying up when
I'm in I'm good but I've just got so
much going on yeah you like make the
time that's a problem right when you
become a little bit successful for your
some food there's a lot of food
documentaries you know trying to get you
to eat differently so I thought I'd
watch the wall i binge don them one
weekend while I was doing other stuff
and I got hungry know one of it one of
the guys he was trying to lose 100
pounds or something so every 15 pounds
he lost he put a bowling ball up on the
counter and said that is what I'm not
carrying around with me
whoa because the bowling balls about 15
pounds I said wow he's measuring weight
in bowling balls
that's something because we said I'm
three pounds less than two pounds that
that doesn't hit you emotionally the way
a bowling ball does yeah after you've
lost 15 pounds because no one wants to
be carrying that around so
psychologically I thought that was quite
potent that is potent anyway I think we
do need so I usually use like plates I
think of weight plates or dumbbell okay
yeah
yeah yeah yeah I I started doing
intermittent fasting pretty recently
where I only allow myself to eat ten
hours in a day
oh wow that's and I was out of the 24
hours yes so I mean I had a Terry Crews
on my radio show another talk that boys
my boys ripped yeah looks great
he's still and he's like 47 or something
I mean he's so he doesn't eat until 12
noon ah until after 10 o'clock that's
right yeah he doesn't eat after 10
there's a 10 hour thing and so he has to
he's watching everyone else have brunch
and breakfast and so he's got to
overcome that but so it's a little bit
of fasting yeah and today intermittent
fasting just to keep the discipline I
think it's at the end of day it's really
just discipline what is that it also
forces your body to burn fat instead of
carbohydrates and what forces your body
to burn fat that state of ketosis is
actually easier to maintain because you
don't you don't get hungry yeah then you
look there's no roller coaster yeah
crash the carbohydrate crash that you
get is that outside of the realm of
possibility for you know I can totally
I'm a ketosis guy it's in there I once
got raked over the coals not by everyone
but I tweeted once I said if there was a
diet book written by a physicist it
would contain one sentence consume
calories at a lesser rate then at a
greater rate no consume calories at a
lesser rate than you burn them that is
sort of true that's the one sentence
yeah no it's more complicated than that
and if we just try to get all no words
this is that in that and one of the
great things of physics when you do
physics is all the details are just cut
off the it's window dressing and you get
down to the window itself and that's
what the analysis works on I have rarely
seen you attacked but I did see you
attacked when you were celebrating Sir
Isaac Newton's birthday oh I was like
that people were so mad they might lost
their mind when you were by the way
incorrect in the date of Jesus's
birthday that is not the date of Jesus
did not
was not born on the 25th route it's just
I didn't even mention it so what I said
was but was that to this day is my
highest retweeted tweet I tweeted it so
you remember this actually a couple
years ago yeah so it was a so on
December 25th comes there it is oh you
get you get you got on this day long ago
a child was born who by age 30 would
transform the world happy birthday Isaac
Newton born December 25th 1642
seventy-nine thousand retweets
oh yeah thousand like people just lost
they were so mad they were angry and I
thought well interesting because I'm
just speaking the truth here yes he
transformed civilization by actually he
did it by the time he was 26 so yes it's
provocative because you're expecting
that Jesus is gonna end that but I'm
thought I'd share some some actual truth
with people and so some people
celebrated it deeply religious people
one had a headline saying neil degrasse
tyson is trolling Christians on
Christmas Day well I said I said Newton
at least has the benefit of actually
having being born that day then later on
it's actually more subtle than that with
Newton because he was on the Julian
calendar which was which is ten day
shifted from the goog Orion calendar so
if you ask what would his birthday be
today it would be January 4th not
December 25th so yeah but when he was
born his mother was celebrating
Christmas so that's really what matters
for that tweet well it's such a bizarre
thing anyway because if you're a real
Christian you would understand that the
the birthday was shifted in order to
comply with pagan religions that's
exactly it was it landed I don't know
how many people know that actually I
mean you're a well-read guy but so if
you give me a minute to just explain
that so
December 21st we know is the first day
of winter shortest day of the year and
what makes it short shortest day light
of the year and what makes it short the
arc of the Sun across the sky is very
low the Sun doesn't get very high and it
doesn't stay up for very long and it's
been coming a lower in lower arc every
day on route to December 21st
the ancient peoples were worried about
this because everyone worshipped the Sun
because it made your crops come and gave
you warmth and you say wow if this keeps
going lower and lower in the sky we're
gonna lose the Sun entirely December
21st the Sun slows down and it stops
this load this drop in it's moving
across the sky from day to day so that
stopping of the Sun is solstice that's
Latin the stationary sun-like armistice
stationary arms right from the end of
the First World War
weather November 11th that was Armistice
solstice so so the movement of the Sun
lower in the sky stops but that doesn't
mean it's gonna come back it takes a few
days for is to to slow down stop and
then reverse these oh it is coming back
let's celebrate that and that's a few
days after December 21st
there's about December 25th a pagan
holiday celebrating the return of the
Sun Christianity is trying to take
foothold where there were pagans once
roamed and you put celebrations that
match theirs
just so that the the shift is not as
hard for you and the unknown birthday of
Jesus was then assigned this pagan day
of celebration to make that transition
easier for the pagans to become
Christians and sure enough it remained
Christmas Day the birth of Jesus the
speculated birthday of Jesus is like the
spring the spring there's some there's
some passages of course in the New
Testament that reference with the Sheep
we're doing plus there's a census being
taken by the Romans you know which is
what and and Mary goes to the manger the
animals are not in the manger not at so
there's secondary evidence for that's
probably happened in the spring now with
the advent of commercial space travel
it seems seems inevitable right love you
love your segways don't do you think
that it's possible that maybe you can
even offer up a flat earth believer tour
where you take them like at the very
least take them up to Alaska where it's
light show 23 hours calling in to you
this is tweeting me constantly to me
constantly yeah call me a sellout I'm a
sell
I'm a round earth sellout like as if
there's some round earth money you're on
the payroll check I'm getting some round
earth round earth paola for your show
I'm sure you seen the basketball player
who graduated from Duke from Duke that
was hit in the news last couple of days
believes that dinosaurs are fake mm-hmm
and that the world is flat okay so
here's the thing Joe yeah I've thought
about this I bet you have as an educator
I've thought about this okay
so here's here's what matters we live in
a free country people should be able to
think whatever they want whenever they
want provided it doesn't subtract away
from someone else's rights okay so if
thinking the earth is flat doesn't harm
anyone unless you want to run for office
or you want some position of power over
other people that's when it's dangerous
I thinking of elevator banks where they
have numbers you know I have a photo
essay of with what elevators look like
inside I know it's just I mean the gears
no no no no no no no not even that geeky
just what are the numbers on the panel
without the 13 you mean yeah yeah
exactly so about 80% of buildings taller
than 12 stories don't have a 13th floor
okay and so this tricks a deca phobia
yeah is again in a free country if you
if you want to be afraid of the number
13 go right ahead
it just seems to me you should not be
tasked with designing elevators if
that's your fear find something else to
do
holding aside the fact that I'm a little
scared that in this 21st century United
States of America we have people walking
among us afraid of the number 13 what
does that mean I don't know in the long
run but if you keep to yourself and
don't harm others think whatever you
want so that the rubber hits the road is
if you now have power over others and
that's where the failure of the
educational system actually manifests
well then societies and cultures
laughs but it's not that they don't know
that there's a 13th floor and that
you're just calling it the fourth a
Sharpie cross off the four deuce
that's the 13th floor you're not fooling
anybody now when you see it on an
elevator and you're like you see no 13
and plus they try to fake you out how
you do that so they go 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 and then you have to go to the
next row to begin to for the whole team
so you don't see 12 right next to 14 and
that some other some modern buildings
will put their their their the heavy
machinery like the HVAC on the 13th
floor so that there's no residency right
but they could still say it's the 13th
floor and then there's a 14th floor yeah
yeah does anybody ever have a dummy 13th
button where you press it it never
lights up like I don't get it I can't
get in that's interesting that's what I
would do oh you just put it there to
satisfy me but you still nobody lives
there exactly what that's too clever oh
this is one of the 20% of people that
make sense this is what a great building
I mean while there is no 13th floor it's
just a dummy button that Twilight Zone
episode with the mannequins they went up
to the 11th floor but there is no 11th
floor and the mannequins come to life at
night ooh I forgot about yeah they leave
the store floors and they all go up to
11 then have a cocktail party and they
vote which one of them is gonna go out
and become human for a day the twilight
zone was so good who's the best
television there ever was like still to
this day ever used up so many great
premises great premises great actors
great cinematography and was in black
and white so shadows were completely
dark yeah because you shadows don't have
much meaning when you're filming color
because everything is just there but in
black and white and the shadows create
mood and yeah so I watched to serve man
the other
I had it I had it on the DVR on my
collection plate lurch yes yes on The
Addams Family yeah that was a great one
because it was just like it had all the
elements of people going well you know
they seem nice they seem nice
yeah yeah and they solve all of our war
and our yeah that was great
that's another good one was the the
invaders do to remember this one knew
this was a this was a one-woman
performance and I forgot who it was it
was it not Agnes Moorehead one of these
women of that era it'll come to me in a
minute
and she's living alone in a farmhouse no
electricity she's got a farm and she's
alone and some alien spacecraft lands on
a roof and it's got these devices it's
got these saws and blazars cutting
through things and she's freaking out
she's got the pan in the pots and the
rolling pin and and she then she gets
the goods the shotgun and she's
attacking this thing it's and and you
don't know what it is and it's got
lights and a thing and it's this tiny
little thing it's like three inches
across right and it turns out that's the
thing that's attacking her and then she
finally like comes that's it
see the little little robot okay and and
inside she said and then I got to give
it what this shows 40 years old I can
give the punchline
okay so she actually successfully
damages the thing and then that you zoom
in on it right and then you hear a radio
transmission from the aliens that are
inside and it says
yeah hello hello Houston there's a giant
who's trying to attack us we need help
send backups oh it was great like whoa
we were the invaders that was us landing
on her home on some other planet or some
parallel earth from some other dimension
service we are we no no no no oh she
okay yeah I get it
no she's oh it's another planet she's
that Chinese the giant but they're
saying there's a giant attacking us
right but the whole show you have her
pointed means the these aliens are
trying to hurt her
when they're just it was our space probe
just trying to explore its environment
but isn't it possible that it's like
another dimension it's us in another
dimension and they are landing on earth
accepted it hmm no no I mean they were
they were speaking English I couldn't
isn't that the definition of infinity
that somewhere some if there is really
an infinity there is not only a you and
and I but there's a you and I and
everybody else we've ever met and all
the exact events and the exact same
order have gone down an infinite number
of times including this conversation
okay except except there is I don't how
many people know this but often it's
mind-blowing when you learn that some
infinities are bigger than others Joe
Rogan just leaned two feet away from the
microphone
not all infinities are the same size
it's infinity then it's infinities well
what is no okay don't you remember when
you were kid I said what's the biggest
number you know a million was a million
and one right how about a billion was a
billion and one who the annoying kid
always added one two okay how about
infinity well infinity and one Friday
well turns out infinity 1 and if any are
the same number okay so here's the so
for example the number of of counting
numbers so 1 2 3 up to infinity ok right
the numbers you would use to count
things that's infinite the number of
irrational numbers so the numbers that
you cannot represent as a fraction okay
that there's more there more of those
than there are counting numbers whoa by
4 so these are orders of infinity then
there are more there are more
transcendental numbers then there are
irrational numbers what's a
transcendental mom so that's a number
that you'll never find as a solution to
to an algebraic equation so pi is a
transcendental number e is a
transcendent these are these are magic
numbers that show up in mathematics and
there's turns out there's
like an even bigger infinity of those
than there is of these other two classes
of numbers and they use the the the the
Hebrew letter Aleph in in in ranking so
LF one l f2 l f3 elephant I think there
are five levels of infinity so my point
is just because there's infinite
universes to me doesn't mean there's
infinite conversations that have
happened and I'd want to really explore
the depths of infinities before I say
and agree with you that this
conversation has happened a million you
know an infinite number of times in just
this way except you have a different
engineer sitting next to us or and an
infinite number of times where it's been
Jamie - right yeah that's the argument
that's that's given but I think that we
there's some nested infinities in there
that deserve some explanation my Phoenix
region is not handling this well well
that's that's fine as I've said as I say
in the in the in the epigraph of of the
book book is not available yet but I
have a copy haha
astrophysicist for people in a hurry
astrophysics for people in a hurry
astrophysics for people in a hurry oh
you can say quick you gotta say there
cuz you're in a hurry so the epic the
epic the epigram on that is the universe
is under no obligation to make sense to
you that that's ration I have time for
and so it makes sense to you that the
universe is under no obligation to make
sense so it's okay if your brain hurts
when I say there's a ranking of
infinities but but you shouldn't say
that doesn't make sense therefore it is
not true I definitely wouldn't say that
but what what confuses me is the word
infinity because I had always taken the
word infinity to mean something that has
no end so how can something that has no
end be larger than something else so the
way they do that mathematically the way
to demonstrate that mathematically is
used you map one item in the set of this
infinity to corresponding items in the
set of the oven other infinity so you do
this so you take the one and your map it
to like the first transcendental number
take the two to the second you just keep
doing this and when you do that
mathematically what you find that one
infinity
outstrips the other infinity Wow and
then you left with more with more
numbers so that shows you that you have
a bigger infinity now when you find I
mean there's there's a new NASA
announcement that's supposed to is it
Monday that's supposed to be announced
or attention
tomorrow the exoplanets a Wednesday yep
so it's Wednesday I don't I don't have
you have you see details I'm not
authorized do see details okay let me
invent some juicy details that it could
be so NASA so so he's been good at
segwaying lately he doesn't jump in he's
just jumping I know you get that just
yeah I'm flying back to thanks for
fitting this in Joe I open this place up
at 3 in the morning oh man I'm very I'm
feel the love so thank you so here's
some things that could because NASA is
saying that it's it's a it's a stunning
new announcement well what could be more
than the fact that we already know that
there are there are earth-like planets
orbiting in the Goldilocks zone of the
nearest star to the Sun Proxima Centuri
can you do better that than that for me
NASA I don't think so unless you got
some extra stuff you're going to tell us
like what's been a cottage industry in
the last couple of years is the
observation of planet atmospheres as the
planet passes in front of the host star
light from the host star passes through
the atmosphere and it is all and the
light signatures altered by the
chemistry of the atmosphere so depending
what the chemicals are it'll influence
the spectrum that you get and when you
do that you can say what the chemical
composition of the atmosphere is that's
of that star is there's certain there's
a certain combinations of elements that
we would call biomarkers no we can't
look down to the surface of the planet
and look at cities if there are any but
there are consequences in the atmosphere
to there being life on the surface such
as is there oxygen there I used to think
when I was watching Star Trek when I was
a kid because I saw it in real time
that's how old I am
when it first came out original series
yep Star Trek characters never wore
spacesuits yeah
you ever wonder I mean you ever thought
about that okay what happens is they
visit planets they have nitrogen oxygen
atmosphere Jim alright well that's what
our atmosphere is nitrogen right so they
find planets with nitrogen oxygen they
go down they don't need a spacesuit so
I've actually thought about that and
that's their solution so that must mean
there be planets that you could find
that that well here's the thing we have
oxygen on earth only because there is
life on Earth not any kind of life
photosynthesizing life we have life that
takes sunlight turns it into chemical
energy into itself into wood into plants
and one of its byproducts is oxygen
oxygen is chemically active if you took
away all plants tomorrow that oxygen
would slowly get absorbed chemically
into the environment and then you would
not have oxygen there to be viewed by
aliens trying to see if we have life
here and it's pretty surprising to
people note that we're mostly nitrogen
in our oh yeah we're 78% nitrogen in our
atmosphere so I you know what happens if
you have too much oxygen if you have
like let's say 50% oxygen you're really
high right what happens is like a forest
fire would never go out oh yeah yeah
because oxygen feeds combustion and so
you could basically burn all vegetation
in the world if the oxygen went above
certain thresholds so you need it high
enough so that you can still have oxygen
metabolism but not so high that it's bad
for lightning triggered forest fire so
if there if in this if I don't know the
announcement but I'm just guessing here
because it's been a cottage industry the
last couple of years let's find these
biomarkers do you have unstable
chemistry going on in that atmosphere
because if you do it means something's
generating it and and certain
combinations of chemistry tells you
there's likely to be life of some kind
now just a couple decades ago we had
speculation of other planets but we
really didn't have any tangible proof in
fact any one any time I give a public
talk you do this at your in your gigs
that's who here's born since 1995
okay and you your audience leans young
so there'll be some fraction of the
audience it'll raise their hand and so
what I do is I Knight them as generation
exoplanet because 1995 was the first
year that an that a planet outside of
our own solar system was discovered so
they have been alive only during a time
we've known of other star systems that's
so crazy
Generation X oh wow that's what I want
to start that movement so it's so crazy
that's so recent I mean it is oh yeah I
was living out here yes 20 is 24 years
ago
22 years ago yeah that's it that's
insane if you stop and think about how
what a short period of time it is and in
that period of time there's like rising
through 3,000 exoplanets this is the
advance of tape that that's not just
science advanced that's that's
Engineering and Technology and
intelliscan and imaging quality and it
is a lot that goes on to the advance of
science it's not just how clever you are
in an Einsteinian way it's do you know
good engineers to build a device to make
the measurement this is how we
discovered gravity waves
now what's your take on that planet
that's supposed to be outside the Kuiper
belt
that's planet 9 so far yeah yeah all the
data look convincing so what they've
done is they've looked at other objects
in the Kuiper belt and looked at these
are colleagues of mine at Caltech so
it's it's a Mike Brown who you know I
get blamed for killing Pluto but I was
an accessory for sure but I didn't
definitely didn't kill that dude kill
Pluto all right he found another object
that was basically the size of Pluto out
there so either you make that a planet
or you demote Pluto and how much smaller
is Pluto and say our moon oh so so don't
get me started our moon has five times
the mass of Pluto so the moon the
Pluto's was lame from the beginning all
right we thought it was big we wanted it
to be big we we we made it one of us one
of the nine and it's size didn't settle
out until the late 1970s when we had
better and better more accurate ways to
measure its size and that's when we
learned it's small even compared to our
own but granted we have a big moon
if you're not gonna think our moon is a
planet you're certainly not gonna think
the Pluto is a planet so this hop you
let me just tell you how they did so
they found these other objects out there
the same team a Constantine but gives
pronounce his last name but ding Jian
and Mike Brown but both at Caltech and
they found these objects in the outer so
the Kuiper belt of icy bodies we're of
which pluto is a member you track their
motion and you say okay if I add up all
the gravity that's affecting them and
they should move this way but they don't
they move another way a different way so
either Newton's laws of gravity are
failing in the outer solar system or
this some object out there whose gravity
you have yet to reconcile with the
motions of these objects so they said
let's assume Newton is right what object
do we have to put out there at what
distance and at what size to influence
the movement of these Kuiper belt
objects in the way we see it and do they
do this through bodes law no no we're
way past winner no we wait wait thanks
for remembering both law but both law
was an early measure of where you might
find a new planet it was based on mass
and gravity no no both law was a simple
arithmetic tool all the did was
basically double the distance with a
certain additive parameter double the
distance of some planets so for example
you know and there was a little there's
a factor in there that helped the inner
planets come out right but let's look at
Mars Mars is like 2 and 1/2 times
Earth's distance from the Sun what comes
after Mars Jupiter Jupiter is five times
her assistants ah
Saturn is 10 times 1 to the 5 to 5 to 10
so Bob's law is just a simple arithmetic
scheme it's not based in any known
physics it was only based on the solar
system in the solar system itself that's
right so and it worked and yet you have
to fudge your way to get mercury to work
in that oh really and it wouldn't didn't
have Pluto
of course pool it wasn't a plan in any
way but anyhow it was a it was a is a
fudgy way that was mostly right by
accident and this was in like what year
was this oh that was 1,800 spaces oh
yeah yeah so now we have advanced
computer programming very high precision
modeling and there's
there's got to be a planet somewhere
here in this arc of the sky let's look
for it
because we think that's what's affecting
the orbits of these other objects and
that is a completely noble way to
discover a planet that's how Neptune was
discovered and because now everyone
looked at the orbit of Uranus and said
you know Uranus is not following
Newton's laws
maybe maybe Newton's laws don't work
that far out has never been tested that
far and they say well let's let's assume
it works and ask what would have to
influence it and whether it's a
difficult mathematical calculation
because you're not saying here's the
object what's the gravity field you're
saying here's the gravity field
I need where must the object be and how
massive must it be that's a much harder
mathematical problem to solve and so
once the the the the errant orbit of
Uranus was known and calculated they
started looking for another planet and
that's how they discovered planet
Neptune Wow
so now when they're looking at this
planet 9 I hope I said that right it was
the movement of Uranus's orbit was not
following proper laws and they inferred
the presence of Neptune they said look
here tomorrow night and they looked
there and they found it Wow
yes it was a brilliant display of and no
we're going back to the 19th century so
I mean people people were badass that
every generations got their badass
scientists now how much further out from
the known solar system is this planet so
I'm not quick to call it planet 9
because so far it's twenty thousand
times farther away from the Sun than the
earth is so I'm not sorry you're not
sorry I'm not feeling like calling
Connecticut New York City so but it's
something massive right it's like six
times the mass of yeah I forgot what
mass they were assigning it but yeah it
would if that were in our solar system
to be no question you would label it as
a planet and it wasn't there one time
speculation that it was some sort of a
burnt-out star no not that mass no no no
no you might be thinking you're if
that's what I think you're thinking you
got good memory the long ago in a galaxy
far away so I'm talking about 1970s
people looked at the extinction record
on earth and every 20,000 years they
found a little blip a little dip in the
fossil record where we lost some species
and people were wondering why could
there have been some flux of comets
raining down periodically on the earth
wreaking havoc on the ecosystem
rendering species extinct in these
periodic intervals if there is maybe
there's some double star to the Sun
Ryanair a star system so they invoked it
and then they called it they gave became
a name what they called it nemesis they
gave it a name and so you know what
period orbital period that object must
have has got to match the extinction
periodicity and so it's got to be a
20,000 year period and so but people
look for it they couldn't find it and
then you reanalyze the the extinction
records and it was you you had to fudge
it to make it look like it was periodic
so basically we've abandoned the idea of
net of nemesis and aren't binary star
systems really common yeah more than
half the star as you see in the night
sky or binary or multiple systems in
fact the iconic image from Star Wars the
original Star Wars movie before they
numbered them I think what star wars for
Rooney right well yeah whatever whatever
that that that that desert planet that
Luke was on and he comes out after
visiting is was was a stepparent know
his adoptive parents were yeah where we
was visiting he comes out and you see a
double sunset so that's basically the
only accurate science in the entire
series I really enjoyed you're taking a
part of gravity gravity and how many
people got mad at me yeah you know so I
stopped comic-con movies I don't need to
piss people off
when I watch a movie I'm having those
thoughts anyway so I might as well share
them with people if you're interested so
I did just that and then people the last
time I did it was for Star Wars The
Force awakens Star Wars 7 I had a series
of tweets you know one of them was bb-8
a smooth rolling metal spherical ball
would have skidded uncontrollably on
sand
people got angry so much someone tweeted
back shut the fuck up okay that's so so
I said okay I'm not here to get people
angry I'm just here to enlighten to help
people enhance their movie-going
experience but to the extent it is not
accomplishing this I don't need to do it
I'm just saying I don't I'm an educator
I thought I was being nice I don't need
to do so I haven't tweeted about a movie
since then I got tweets I could watch
them stop you I have tweets I could post
about arrival please dear why I didn't
watch watched a little bit of a shutter
off okay no you got to give it a chance
as soon as I see a movie that starts out
I don't spoil or it starts out with a
sick kid I'm like fuck you no no in fact
it's very not about the kid I'm sure
that's what I keep it's totally not
about the kid Jamie hated it oh yeah
yeah okay so you just give it a chance
but anyhow so I just stopped maybe I'll
come back but I'm know it yeah people
need to know raveh t that was good that
you explained that the not only is it's
not plausible those two satellites
aren't anywhere near each other oh my
god worse said oh there's the there's
the International Space Station and I'm
on the Chinese Space Station let me just
jetpack my way there yes
do you really excuse me lady do you hey
lady do you know how far away these are
from one another
you're gonna jet around from one space
station - but no can't do it
tens of thousands of miles from one
another for goodness sakes Oh Betty I'm
so yeah you remember please it was like
15 tweets
and I didn't know that was what I
realized like the press was reading my
movie tweets and those tweets is it now
a couple years ago when gravity came out
with Sandra Bullock and and and what's
the news name George Clooney so i eated
it and they got talked about on the on
The Today Show sent the set the weekend
Today Show on NBC
then it was talked about on NBC Nightly
News then my tweets were talked about a
Saturday Night Live's The Weekend Update
it was like the NBC trifecta and I said
oh my gosh
this was I had not that was not the
point I didn't seek this did fine I'm
glad
they are reacting this way because that
means they care about the science maybe
but what Seth Meyers did cuz he was
doing Weekend Update at the time he said
astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson
harshly criticized the movie gravity
saying has contains a number of
scientific inaccuracies for example
there is no way George Clooney would
have spent that much time talking to a
woman his own age that's hilarious
I think Stan turbo is still younger than
George Clooney though so they should
have got their facts but yeah but not by
much I mean yeah they're in the same
neighborhood yes yeah III think it's
important I think you enjoy the movie
it's great it's fun and everything like
that but it's important to point out
what the science errors are I think I
think I think the movie could have done
better
honestly the things that could have made
this a movie why did people thought I
didn't like the movie when all I was
doing is pointing out things they got
wrong by the way they did some stunning
things correctly for example this is
this is brilliant if you're in zero-g a
fire basically puts itself out so think
about when you burn a candle it on earth
so you like the wick if there's people
have candles anymore they forgot what a
candle is you light it with a match that
you used to get from smoking lunches at
bars all right so you light the candle
and it stays lit the fuel is the wax the
oxygen continually comes in because it
heats the air around it and the air
rises hot air rises and fresh air comes
in from below and has fresh oxygen so
the can will stay lit until it burns all
the way down in space if you light a
candle you can light the candle it'll
heat the air but the air will not know
where to go because it's not lighter
than everything because it's in zero-g
it'll stay clustered around the candle
the cannibal use up all the oxygen in
that bubble and then it'll put itself
out they did this in the movie so why do
they have some good sense because they
may you can't think of everything so
they just have you on staff well no they
can you in so you can't think of
everything so that wasn't judgmental so
much as this movie the fact that it got
so much right
is what put it on my map to criticize
what it got wrong that make sense does
that make them a yes okay yeah oh the
hair her bangs should have been floating
now if you might think I'm in my
nitpicky no because if you look at any
picture somebody with hair okay in space
in zero-g their hair is flying
everywhere it's the first thing you
notice about them
it is so obvious like wow that's the
cool you're not thinking about the
spaceship or the tie technology you're
looking at the hair doing stuff you will
never see happen on earth unless someone
is like underwater and they're jiggling
their head so they would have to film it
all in zero gravity they would have to
film it on one those drop things yeah or
the drop thing you they'd have to be
clever about it and she only had bangs
that's all you have to figure out it
they did other clever things so anyway
that's all I did
please by the way in all fairness to
movies I'll call out something that's
good the science that movie got right
that otherwise got no science right I'll
be I'm the first in line to do that like
what Oh
in the movie monsters ink oh my gosh
those doors were four dimensional
portals to another that that's possible
well if you had four dimensions that's
what it would look like do you remember
the movie yes they take the doors home
yes they opened the door and they're in
the closet of the kid that they're gonna
terrorize yes you that's a wormhole
that's what that is what access to the
fourth dimension looks like do you think
scientifically that's possible one day
yes I hope so I hope so really because
here's the example we've got a nice
broad desk we hear it that this
interview right so desk is two
dimensions it's got length and width and
I can start putting papers on this desk
and I can lay them out mosaic style and
then all of a sudden I have no more room
to put a sheet of paper if I'm an aunt
living in this surface of the desk
I say no more room but wait a minute we
are three-dimensional people and I can
put an organizer and and and stack
things vertically so I can take a sheet
of paper and I can put it higher up than
the surface of the desk the aunt will
say where did it go
oh my gosh it disappeared
in some portal we know know what what is
that it went into the third dimension in
the ant bound and obviously is a three
dimensional thing right imagine it's it
only lives in two dimensions you would
have made that paper disappear into a
third dimension and it will have no clue
where it went because you had a portal
you had access to that extra dimension
so look at how much you can store on a
desk when you have access to a third
dimension above it vastly more than just
papers mosaicked out on the surface so
now let's up this example by a dimension
you're storing boxes in a room or I ran
out of room no you didn't let's open
this four dimensional door you open it
put the boxes through the door close the
door
box is gone they'll be awesome for
hoarders you uh you look around the
other side of the bottle that the door
there's nothing there right though your
side of the door nothing there just a
door that is a portal to a fourth
dimension that can hold vastly more
content then what is what you're stuck
storing in the three dimensional space
of your room now that's a concept so
that's a brilliant concept and even
though it has monsters that don't exist
that all speak English and to one of
them is a cyclops and one of them is a
you know I'm not judging the bio
physiology of these creatures but they
got the physics of four dimensional
portals completely accurate now the
concept of dimensions is work it's
really abstract with people I love me
some dimensions and it is abstract it is
yeah that's why you've let the math take
you into those higher dimensions because
our intuition will not will fail for us
right well that's where it gets weird oh
and when you say take the math let the
math take you so like when quantum
physicists use these legal and notepads
those yellow pads and right all that
crazy stuff down that nobody but you and
maybe them understand and when you look
at all those equations notes them maybe
me maybe new then you probably
understand it right but I definitely
don't my point is what are they exactly
figuring out that allows them to say
there are I think they say at one point
time was 11 but I think they've expanded
that right I don't have the latest
dimension
on the universe but what the way it
works is you try to make sense of the
world right and so you take some leaps
so some some philosophical Leafs leap
some mathematical leaps you say all
right
maybe all particles that manifest as an
electron a proton a neutron may barks
maybe they're just strings of energy
vibrating at different frequencies and
we sense these different frequencies as
different particles let's just go there
for okay well if you're going to do that
what are the consequences to it then how
many dimensions do these vibrating
strings require to have the properties
that we see in our dimensionality so so
the exercise of explaining what you see
takes you to places that you've never
been before and that's fine places at
intellectual places that you've never
been previously unplumbed there's
nothing wrong with that we've done that
before we that's why we know what is
happening in the center of the Sun have
we ever been there no no but we know how
matter behaves under pressure and
temperature we can do that in a
laboratory we've got a Sun sitting out
there with a surface temperature a mass
a certain luminosity and we say what
must be going on down in the core let's
bring our best physics a quantum physics
our our chemistry our nuclear physics
bring it all together and we have a
complete understanding of what's going
on in the center of the Sun and we're on
to other problems now even though we've
never visited there so when they're
going over this math of the mathematics
and like observable things that we have
right now or at like the atomic and
subatomic level we don't you can't see
do you realize the electron just okay so
I buy I mean I did a whole series of
this there's something called the the
great courses lecture series it's a yeah
it was a sponsor this podcast for a
while would really okay great courses so
cool
so I was once invited to be one of their
professors for the great courses and I
taught a very short most of them are
like 30 lectures it's like a whole
college semester so
and I don't have the time the energy so
they let me do like short bits so one of
them is only six parts and it's called
the inexplicable universe and it's six
parts of everything about which we know
nothing in this universe you might say
well that's a pretty easy course to give
okay on to the next one you might be
something Dark Matter we don't know stay
tuned so but it's interesting to learn
how we come to know what we don't know
and so it's it's an exploration of our
ignorance and I'm very proud of it
because it's it's not what you'd
normally find in electro series and it's
still it's still out there but one of
the things I will tell you then I'll
tell you now
the electron has no known dimension it
is smaller than the smallest we have
ever had the capacity to measure so as
far as we in concern it is infinitely
small well we have no way to even know
how to measure by the way how do you
measure something small you get
something smaller and find out how many
of those it is think about the
challenges at each extreme ask me how
big is the universe and I'll say it's as
big as well I got nothing what am I
gonna say right there's nothing as big
as the universe so at the biggest engine
at the littlest end there's not
something else
it's it doesn't work as well okay to try
to say what it is relative to something
else do you entertain the possibility
that the biggest send the littlest end
of the same thing meaning that at our
the smallest measurable point that
literally might be a whole nother
universe that like might be fractal it's
fun to think about it I mean all the way
down yeah it's fun to think about again
Finelli down like that however and
people by the way in in the 1920s when
we discovered the atom and its structure
and that there's an electron him quote
orbit around a nucleus it was that way
we've been there before we got planets
orbiting the Sun and so this this so
maybe it's a mini solar system may
it's its solar systems all the way down
well I'm glad you brought this up I'm
glad we brought this up because I wanted
to bring this question I almost forgot
there's a photograph of a brain cell and
side by side with a photograph of the
known universe and they look eerily
similar so you're talking about the
large scale structure
yeah the universe with large-scale
structuring of galaxies so I'll get to
that in a minute
okay so I'll get to that so do you ever
tell him just pull up his own damn
images so you so why that's not likely
okay it was an entertained idea but
here's why it's not likely the
manifestation of the laws of physics are
different at the atomic scale than they
are at the macroscopic scale they're
just simply different a planet can take
any orbit sensible for its velocity
around a host star an electron cannot
its energy levels are predetermined and
quantized hence the word quantum the
prefix quanta in quantum physics so if
it was a continuum of matter and energy
following the same laws of physics then
I would say then it's Sol systems all
the way down but the rules completely
change and so things can on the surface
seem similar but when it comes time to
understand them and to analyze them and
to manipulate them and to exploit their
conduct and their behavior for other
means as we have done with atoms and
molecules for the entire IT revolution
you no longer are they the same and you
abandon this romanticized concept so now
with the neurons the network of neurons
and they cluster the clusters of
galaxies and galaxies
super clusters that would be on the
right neurons on the left that's so
eerie yes so so yeah they can look the
same but they operating under completely
different laws of physics
so in other words the laws of physics
that that dictate what's going on in
brain cells have no relationship to
what's going on in the universe brain
cells you're undergoing we can tell you
what forces are operating it's it's it's
electromagnetic forces brain cells use
electrical impulses chemical impulses
this is why drugs can affect the brain
all right they're chemically there's
chemistry going on in the brain in its
natural state you disrupt that enhance
it you just put you just put down some
some some chemistry in your stomach
that's now affecting your brain what you
just drink there what was it alpha brain
okay yeah so you're entering the
chemistry so it's chemistry what's going
on on the large scale structure the
universe is not chemistry right there's
some chemistry deep within but it's not
the chemist is not what's making that
pattern and because of that it becomes
an artistic curiosity not something that
has any kind of deep scientific insight
so it's just a fascinating similarity
yes it's a fascinating similarly put
them up together and it's fun to think
about it but it's not it's fun to think
about it artistically but not
scientifically no it's great if you're
hanging out with your friends going wow
man now when you're looking at subatomic
particles excuse me and you looking at
these like when they observe particles
in superposition where they're moving
and stationary at the same time or they
blink in and out of existence like when
you get down to that and I repeat the
the opening page of the book the
universe is under no obligation to make
sense so at that scale things that go on
with atoms and molecules fall outside of
your life experience you don't hang out
at the bar with protons new client and
nucleons or you know other nucleons or
or molecules you just don't so what they
do in their day is completely foreign to
you so now you shrink down to that size
and particles are popping in and out of
existence they're they become conjoined
quantum mechanically conjoined and it's
completely weird and you would say this
is none of this makes sense and this is
observable Oh
in a visual sense well it depends
depending how big the phenomena is
otherwise you can see other things that
would happen that you know that are the
manifestations of that happening right
but yeah so an electron is smaller even
than that oh yes by how many factors no
no we don't even know we don't know the
size of an electron the concept of super
string theory so a super vibrating
string you're smaller than that yes they
the strings would have to be smaller
thinner smaller than the electron itself
by many many that I don't I couldn't
quantify for bringing a string theory
person so it's like at the bottom of
what we can observe well that's a great
question what is the bottom and you know
the word atom which was introduced by
the Greeks you know what Adam means in
Greek it has a translation you know it
means no indivisible so they imagine
that all matter was you'd come down to
something that was indivisible how about
that oh they do figured out they
supposed it and it was the first day we
you know they were wealthy and had free
time and you know when they weren't
waging war you could think and you know
what we think of as philosophy it was
traceable to a lot of what they were
doing back then and the origins of what
science is are traceable to back to back
then that you'd have an idea that
applies to what the universe does that
enables you to predict future behavior
that is science and so so the atom it
turned out is divisible it's divisible
into sub atomic sub atom particles so
you get electrons protons and neutrons
and a whole host of other particles less
familiar they're neutrinos and other
things then it turns out protons and
neutrons are further divisible there you
get quarks out of those and as far as we
know there are only four fundamental
particles in the universe the photon
which is light the electron of which
there are several species there's the
anti electron in this and but just these
are just a simple here the photon the
electron then the quark and the neutrino
that's it everything in the universe
that we've ever observed is May
out of that stuff so those are quote the
atoms of the universe the indivisible
parts if you will now this is no dark
matter could be made of yet another kind
of thing that we don't know yet but we
got top people trying to figure out what
dark matter is we've measured it out
there we just don't know what it is
well it's something like 90 something
percent of the universe dark matter and
dark energy it's 95% of all that drives
the universe and we can measure the
existence of both yet we have no idea
what's driving them this is an awesome
opportunity for you to illuminate this
often it's all in astrophysics for
people in a hurry it's all it may come
down may you can pre-order it which by
the way publishers love it if you
preorder it an adorable beautiful it's a
good size it's adorable
you're gonna pre-order it on Amazon you
know the reason why they publishers like
you to preorder it so that they can
thank you how many yeah they just want
to didn't want to over print they don't
want to under print if they if so they
get a sense of the pre-ordering because
you're not charged until they ship it so
it's a pretty harmless exercise while
we're on this subject of subatomic
particles and and weirdness I wanted to
i wanna if you could illuminate this
often misused explanation for the
observer effect because you know the the
particles waves and you watch them and
observe them and it changes the reaction
it is heavily misunderstood it's
misunderstood because people want to
attribute it to magic the magic design
and the consciousness looking at it but
isn't it in fact just measuring it yes
thank you please explain because I'm so
tired Joe you're good
it just tries you carry your people with
you I try when I'm were you pulling what
what where you getting your people I
don't know I don't own them for sure
definitely not my people very great you
have an admirably diverse following and
then not many people can claim that and
it's probably cuz of your diverse
profile right
I mean why miss open-minded as I can but
top about you smart and you'd read and
you're thoughtful and you're also on
some level respect you'll hear it
somebody out
and you're you know you did you got ummm
anything so no you're in a lot of places
in a lot of spaces and that's a good
thing I mean we need more unity in this
world so so well thank you yeah thank
you so please explain what what people
are getting wrong okay so very simple
it's much simpler than you think okay
all right you ready yes so I'm looking
at you the only reason why I can see you
is because there's light reflecting off
of your face your body into my eyes so
there's light oh yeah those are Hubble
photographs oh my gosh yeah those are
images from their sheets that you put
over the fluorescent light cover and so
when we look up we actually see the
result real images people pretending
it's the nice recording studio well what
I want to do in the future studio I want
to actually build a glass ceiling and
have a full scale image high resolution
image of the stars a planetarium yes
you're describing a pointer exactly call
it that it's a planetarium well
something like but I just wanted an
image sure what you can you know what
you know do it don't do better than that
you get a you just you get a curved
version of those very high resolution
LEDs first yeah okay then you put any
image up there you want the night sky
tonight it's what the sky looks like
from from Alpha Centauri Oh like when
you go to see one of those star shows at
a planetarium and they show it on the
ceiling above you well yes so but
nowadays that the ceiling itself is the
is the source of light rise not
projected from something so then you
just feed that with image data and then
it becomes whatever you want yeah I
could totally yeah you don't know Peter
I got people I mean people that lend you
my people it's Harry I mean my people
for me while you're you know you happy
but you know the people of the past
would teach the people so ok so here
what sound looking at you okay all right
yes and I see you I want to know where
you are so I turn on the lights and I
say there you are all right now let's
make you tinier let's make you mini-me
okay like in the movie
right so now is a tiny version of you a
mini-me version of Joe Rogan now your
little I turn on what you're still there
okay
okay because if the lights are not on I
can't see you I don't know where you are
right it's that simple okay okay when
you start becoming the size of molecules
right on down to the size of an atom and
I ask the question where is Joe Rogan
the atom and I turn on the light to see
you there because I think you're there
the light the photon comes in hits your
atom and pops you into another location
mmm the very act of trying to measure
your position prevents me from measuring
your position and as have Jack shit to
do with your consciousness or your mind
or your eyes or anything it has to do
with the fact that to know you're there
some information has to come from you to
me like shining a light on you and the
small you are the more susceptible you
are to the the energy of the light
changing your position in space so my
question is I was like you know it's
like you ever I don't know if this is
still happened you a quarter spills out
of your pants pocket on the backseat of
a car and is there in the wedge between
the bottom and the backseat
and so you try to reach in to get it and
the act of reaching for the coin makes
the coin move farther away from you
the act of reaching for it right be
separate you're separated and it just
slides down even further
that's not your mind making that happen
it's the it's the act of the measurement
that is affecting what it is you're
trying to measure and this was
discovered in quantum physics and to the
point where that's actually it's a
Heisenberg uncertainty principle it's
one of the basic foundations of all of
quantum physics now when it's just
ground it but when it's described in the
woowoo way you they show these particles
going through these slots and then
observing them changes the pattern that
they go through with and there's a
there's a
a horrible cartoon that you see in that
movie what in the bleep I couldn't get
through that movie
I tried did you go crazy with the bad
science no can I tell you where I turn
maybe I mean well here's what people
don't know a lot of that is from a cult
the woman that I didn't know the woman
who is the I don't mind a cult movie you
know she's a channeler she's speaking as
a character like do you know that that
one blonde woman older blonde woman
that's in that movie okay and she speaks
when she speaks she's speaking as a care
okay I didn't know it you have to like
she's she's a part of like this very
bizarre sort of cult okay and should I
tell you where I tuned it out or you
want to finish okay so I tried to I just
couldn't watch it right there's a point
where they were talking about natives in
the Caribbean seeing European ships yes
and then they said well because they'd
never seen a ship before they brain
didn't register it as anything and then
it just disappeared bullshit and I'm
thinking no that's not half the brain
warehouse excuse me that's not how this
works okay what would happen they might
not know what they're looking at but
they'll know they're looking at
something and they've had ships they
they went from island to island that's
how you get from island to island is it
well that's a really big version yeah
we've never seen anything that big
before I don't know what it is I don't
know where it came from but I want to
find out why I want to study it I wanna
protect myself whatever so just because
you've never seen it doesn't mean you're
not gonna register it excuse me no it's
no I said no but I can't waste my got
other things I got to devote my brain
energy to instead of instead of this but
someone else it oh it gets better later
on so I said maybe I'll ba it gets more
confusing later on and it does a better
job of confusing you as to what science
has shown and what they haven't shown
now by the way just in all fairness to
what they think that the point they were
trying to make there are things that if
you don't know to recognize them you
would they would go undiscovered yes
okay but that doesn't mean you wouldn't
see them okay so for example let's say
you're walking and you didn't know that
you were walk
over this huge burial mound because the
slope was really shallow and you're just
walking okay well you just did you did
you didn't notice that okay so you need
a different way to see it in order to
know so a thumb from space from an angle
it measure the height whatever so there
are ways to miss things that's and that
and that happens all the time right but
if it's something there on the horizon
my gosh this is why we have eyes okay
now they're not the best data taking
devices but it's come time to tell you
where there's a ship or not a ship that
you've never seen before
it's a ship of cork a just so much
evidence of that when people discover
new animals yes before anything anything
there's no record of it whatsoever
people find it and they could still see
most scientific discoveries you
discovered some we've never seen before
Ramtha that was the woman's name that
was the the person that she was double
check that's a cool channeling name yeah
channeling name Ram power Chandler I'd
be ramped though I found that after the
after the the movie was done after I
watched it I wasn't I they got me with a
lot of things so I was like wow is that
true is that real then I started reading
fortunately that movie came out in the
2000s instead of in the 90s because if
it came out in the 90s we were all got
duped oh yeah those we wouldn't have the
internet all the research all the shit
that's wrong with it in the 2000s I
started researching it and then I would
send it to my friends like look look
look what fuck this came from and then
and then you go that's a cold yeah it's
a cult that lady's a cult she said she's
talking like she's an alien she's
supposed to be an alien right isn't that
do you see it in there anyway again I
don't know I don't mind people think
they're channelers I just don't put them
in charge of anything that's all well
it's it's nothing to find it's just that
you should probably say that when you
get going with that nobody's ever said
she's calls herself a ramp they think
it's real and genuine and since and
they're very sincere because they're
yeah they've do put themselves well that
whole thing what you need is is you know
what you need is some foundation of
science literacies
so that you can inoculate yourself
against those who would exploit your
absence of knowledge of how the science
for their own game well not even for
their own gain just YouTube videos I
mean someone could make a very
compelling YouTube video where they get
you convinced that oh my god dinosaurs
aren't real right they start playing
these things for you they tell they tell
you some pounds can pop popcorn in the
sea ever see that one I have seen now
well yeah you line up sometimes more
than they start popping yeah you got it
like Colonel someone yeah that can't
really have no no imagine it could Jesus
Christ look what are we doing with these
folks but there's there's a ton of those
out there where people see that's it's
one of the problems with with a lack of
dialogue with someone who just has one
narrative like you sit down you edit
something and you just talk you know
it's it's it's very similar to like even
if you write a blog I mean that's one
thing if you're writing a blog like say
if you're an expert in electronics you
read a blog about how a television works
but if you're just a person and you
don't really understand what you're
talking about but you write something
and use the right words and you say in a
very compelling way like an attack piece
on someone that really has no basis in
reality you can have someone convinced
this person is a terrible person just by
writing something without them having to
respond I call up stop never do that I
tweet have a tweet if you increase you
and I don't gonna botch it because it's
it's way better as the tweet and I will
ever remember it as the tweet so it was
one of the great challenges in life is
knowing enough to think you're right but
not enough to know you're wrong
yeah well that is a big problem with a
lot of people that watch these YouTube
videos that's what it is they say oh
this is right oh my gosh but they don't
know enough to know why it's wrong well
this is what I want to talk to you about
Oh what is it about people that there's
this this this is this very compelling
need to find something out that other
people don't know like the world is flat
like dinosaurs aren't real like that
kind of stuff is very compelling to
people so what I do in those cases in
the in the a flea yeah so what I do is I
would say instead of debating them and
some of some of your listeners are
listening to this right now and what all
I would do is say what is your best
single bit of evidence
for what you're claiming and what would
it take to show that you're wrong
mmm all right well let's go to a simple
one so that's what I would ask okay and
I've done this exercise and it doesn't
work you know why why because there was
a guy who didn't believe we went to the
moon
we spent a third of our time in our last
session goes there says if someone I
know who doesn't believe he went to the
moon where let me just say he's
skeptical so I said what kind of
evidence would convince you he said
images of the landing site of the Apollo
missions so I said okay here's a website
where we sent fed wasn't Westar was the
Chinese I think the Chinese or Europeans
sent aced a probe to an orbiter to the
moon so that was close enough
because ground-based telescopes are not
precise don't they don't have the
resolution to see the landing sites but
via close enough to the moon you can it
it photographed the entire surface of
the moon and there were the landing
sites and you saw the rover tracks and
the the the base for the lunar module
and so he that night he went home and
found it and then he came back and says
well NASA could have faked that well I'm
done with you we have no more to talk
about because he's not ready to be
convinced well that's a weird because we
gave him the evidence he asked for exact
of that would convince him and it did
not convince him that's a so we have no
other conversation with you that's a
singular event which you could say in
one way or like it is possible that
someone could fake a singular event they
can't fake whether or not the world's
flat right like that to me is the
scariest one that there's so many people
out there that believe the world is flat
because you could you could literally
see the curvature of the earth from a
plane I mean you can get to a parts of
the you look at the images from the
space station where they circled the
moon or they circled the earth rather I
mean there are there's many many
satellite images of the earth in its
entirety you know and one of the things
that the argument was is how come every
photograph of the earth is a compilation
of photographs well because they're all
taken from 300 miles up the earth is
yeah there's a way bigger than 300 miles
you have to take complements you have to
do that's the only way to get will
accept your powerful the polished 17
coming back has the earth that's the
famous one there's Africa and Antarctica
in view it's the full earth very few
full Earth's it's very hard to get a
full Earth single photo of course the
Astra and when we went to the moon the
moon missions when they're coming back
think about it to get full earth means
the Sun is behind the astronauts on the
way back to earth which means the side
of the Moon facing earth is not lit but
that's the side of the moon they came
from so they want to visit the moon
while it's sunlight there they don't
want to need flashlights when they get
to the moon so they visit the moon while
there's sunlight earth the view of Earth
at that time will not be full so Apollo
17 was there long enough so that by the
time they left the moon was basically a
new moon earth was full moon of Earth
was full earth and then they got a full
earth rota those packs that they have on
their back that regulate the temperature
that allows them to walk on the surface
of the moon when it's 250 degrees well
the site is facing the Sun is about more
than 200 degrees and in shadow 250
degrees below yeah so can it switch back
and forth between those two environments
yeah what you need no what you just
insulate the astronauts insulated and so
when you're insulated those temperature
extremes are not felt well so they're
minimized and it's regulated by the pack
it's like a clothes warm don't like
oxygen and no it maintains the
temperature but in the patient voice leh
of warming and cooling in the face of
what's going on it maintains the
temperature that's how you need to think
about it okay so regardless of its
cooling one side of you and chilling the
other and heating the other side right
it's maintaining a temperature for you
and when you are in space like say what
they're doing a spacewalk like on the
space station same things being on the
surface of the Moon this is your
atmosphere on earth you are in this in
this cocoon dare I say of atmosphere so
all the air in this room is the same
temperature because the air can
communicate a difference in temperature
to itself equilibrating it across the
whole room right
if you don't have air then your
temperature is measured by where's the
energy coming from that's heating you
and if the Sun is hitting you all that
energy will be raising your temperature
and the side of you that's not facing
photons that temperature will drop so
you need to you could survive it if you
put yourself on a rotisserie Oh figure
out the right rotation rate and even
then you'd have to spend pretty quick
that's a hog you like that yeah you have
to figure out what the right rate is now
when you get in a debate with a guy like
I don't really guy I don't debate people
okay well when you discuss the same okay
when an argument last more than five
minutes both sides are wrong
that's a terrible saying it's wrong and
the other person stubborn you know could
definitely last for hours yeah it's not
it's true 80% of the time okay okay yeah
um but you got into it with that rapper
that thing said here's I'll tell you why
be a baby good cause in his Twitter
stream he was saying he was invoking
physics and I said I got a I got a deal
with this right yeah and so he showed a
picture from Bear Mountain which is a
mountain in in slightly upstate New York
mm-hmm where Manhattan is in the sight
line of the summit of this mountain and
he says given the curvature of the earth
and this formula you should not be able
to see Manhattan at all okay and it
depends on the height that you're
viewing well thank you well so so you do
the math and it turns out Manhattan the
island would not be visible at all
that's true but any building taller than
15 stories would rise up above the
curvature of the earth and you will see
it and if you look at the photo you see
the tall buildings rising above 15
stories it's exactly what the correct
formula shows and not his formula which
was wrong and misinterpreted claims to
show well it's just bizarre because
snipers have been using the the literal
curve of the earth to plan where bullets
go you have to when you shoot it a mile
you know when you're shooting like well
out over a thousand yards those those
factors so let me think a mile I have to
ask how much curvature of the earth you
get
after miles we also didn't drop question
you get dropped in Kirby gravity drop
yes and then curve yeah so both of those
yeah well this is it good its here's a
thing to say someone if you have a
bullet in your hand and you shoot a gun
which bullocks faster right they yeah
they generally they get the wrong answer
to that yeah drop at the exact same rate
they'll hit the ground at the same exact
same time and that that blows people's
minds they can't believe that but you do
that in physics 101 you know it's it's
an expected physics demo so that's why
it's physics is so important you know
people always take biology and this
grade but don't leave out the physics
because that's where the fundamental
operations of nature are to be found
okay physical universe are to be found
so what you have is you have a gun at
one side it's like a thing that shoots
out a projectile I don't call it a gun
at one side of the stage and then you
have like a little stuffed animal at the
other side stays held up with an
electromagnet at the top of its head and
these two are exactly the same level as
the projectile comes out from the those
mini cannon it trips an electric circuit
that releases the electromagnet at the
top of the stuffed animal the stuffed
animal begins to fall the bullet moves
horizontally but also falls because
gravity is pulling them both and you
watch the projectile curve down you
watch the stuffed animal curve down and
it hits the stuffed animal every single
time the only factor that would change
that would be if you put wings on the
bullet and was dealing with the wind
yeah when wind would affect it yeah do
they have bullets with wings I haven't
seen them no they don't okay no but if
they did yeah you know if like you shot
the bullet I saw that on some James Bond
movie I probably yeah I'm sure it's it's
just gotta be frustrating for you when
these things come back around like there
was no flatter Theory when I was in high
school so there are other things though
think about it when you're in high
school there was much more astrology
going on
oh yeah the President Reagan let's talk
about that Nancy Reagan has an
astrologer
so today you don't see much of it unless
you talk to Steve Maxwell well but it's
still there
it's just not
it's not manifesting in public policy
some people believe in a deeply I agree
but it's not up there in public policy
that's when I said okay well we're the
Nancy Reagan was really the only one
that made it one publisher then but at
the bar - do you hear people saying if
you're a Taurus we should just stop I
miss that I misled myself I thought it
was fading oh but just but Nancy Reagan
was the big proponent it's nonsense
astrology now it's not like someone who
really understands astrological charts
and can plot it in the moons and
retrograde and you were born and you
know Celsius was rising and all that
crazy crap that they tried I don't know
what their I was on a talk show with in
astrology
a real one apparently yes she's real she
says she's real okay and I trust her
because she talks about how fake other
astrologers are don't trust her and she
was saying that the Kennedys all died
during a lunar eclipse Oh scary and you
know that this is a very checkable
statement she just says this and
everyone's listening and believing and
Wow that's that can't be by accident and
well I don't know when other Kennedys
died but I know when Jack Kennedy died
and there was November 22nd 1963 so I so
I don't need to know if there's an
eclipse then I just need to know what
phase the moon is in right because you
can only have a lunar eclipse when the
moon is full so the moon was nowhere
near fall it was like two weeks away
from full even if it wasn't eclipse
it didn't happen during eclipse is my
point right okay so of course because it
was daylight well no no you can have a
lunar eclipse at any time okay
Riu dark it's just not for you it would
be for your world right right
don't be so it's some century in fact
when there's a lunar eclipse anyone on
the side of the earth that sees the moon
will see the lunar
so the so by the way lunar eclipses you
get several per year by the way partial
eclipses as a minimum and every couple
years there's a full lunar eclipses so
these are not rare things to start
they're not rare okay so I said you know
he was shot when the I forgot what muna
was a first quarter moon and she said oh
well this counts if they're anywhere
within two weeks on either side of the
eclipse what that's a month that's a
month it's I said let me just shut up
here and let her keep it was a what is
sharing the time it was a Pharrell had a
talk show we were booked so and he'd
like science by the way and he he want a
cert at the at they at the the Academy
Award group photo
so I got to give him some props for that
but so but so I just said I have nothing
more to say here hence my arguing with
her lasted less than five minutes now
what are they when when they're trying
to decide like what your personality
would be and what you you know hike what
you can dictate from your birth date and
what time you were born what what are
they exactly trying to connect so I I
had a deeper awareness of this recently
when I learned that people take the
names of things very seriously okay the
names mean things to people regardless
of what the thing actually is okay okay
yeah so what might we mean by this so
let's like astrophysically i say we have
this thing called dark matter we don't
know what it is well it's got to be some
kind of matter no no it shouldn't be
called dark matter it should be call
Fred alright with no it shouldn't lead
you to think anything about it because
we do not know what it is we should
really call it dark gravity it is it is
gravity that we have measured we don't
know what's causing the gravity just
call it dark matter implies you think
it's matter some people do but we don't
know so explain to me what what is this
based on like when you say dark matter
what is it based on it's I'd like to
just call it Fred okay let's call it
Fred and I'm saying we don't know what
it is right how is gravity of this stuff
okay it's out there it's six times the
gravity of stuff that's ordinary matter
we don't know where it's coming from
we don't know the source we don't know
the art is it a parallel universe is it
we don't know and how are we measuring
it by its effect on the motions of
objects so a certain strength of gravity
will force you to move at a given speed
as you near it and as you pull away and
we see this in galaxies galaxy clusters
binary galaxies more measured entire
galaxies that are made completely out of
this Fred a month at least 80% of the
force of gravity manifested in these
galaxies is Fred yes and that's why are
they calling it dark matter
they shouldn't in my opinion you call
dark gravity because that's literally
what it is so it's gravity that cannot
be measured or gravity that's not
gravity a pletely understood it's not
understood correct so it's it's
mysterious gravity we're completely
measured to do we measure it you can't
narrow down what measure gravity
precisely right okay so you measure it
but you can't so my talking origin
because some we don't know what it is
right
my point is because someone called it
dark matter
it has swayed everybody into thinking
that it is a matter of some kind
it has constrained people's thoughts
about how to think about this problem
okay so now the ancients looked up and
they saw these stars and they put their
culture on the sky so they're centaurs
there's there's you know where the
center so Center Archer so it's
Sagittarius we have a Ryan the hunter we
have Taurus so we have sea serpents we
have rivers we have stuff that mattered
to people back then okay we have an
Aquarius what is it was the water-bearer
oh the water-bearer
that must mean that when the Sun is in
Aquarius
it's gonna rain more on earth why
because the ancients called it the
water-bearer
ah okay and all of a sudden the name
reigns supreme over the fact that it is
a random set of stars widely separated
in space that don't even look like
people holding a pitcher of water of the
88 constellations about six of them look
like what you're told they're supposed
to look like the rest require opium
induced imagination to establish what
they are so they all have names then you
go to the astrologers tables and they
say oh this is the raine sign or this is
a dry drought sign and there you take
the names of things and those names or
what they interpret based on where the
moon is the Sun is where the planets are
and all whatever the angle
configurations there are and each angle
has a certain latitude over which
they'll count it as a hit rather than as
a miss and so this gives extraordinary
capacity of the astrologer to tell you
what's going on in your life so it's
bullshit but they did have this real
fascinating connection with these
certain constellations and all of the
different things that they thought were
attached these certain constellation
notes you know would be like it'll be
like a geologist going up to the border
of Colorado trying to understand the
shape as a geologist hmm it's it's it's
an arbitrary shape hmm Colorado is a
square on a curved surface it's amazing
how much confirmation bias is attached
to Australia by a river
byah yeah that's right so you know wiki
has a great website on cognitive bias
hmm and there's like 20 or so well known
by every person it should be this should
be a course called cognitive bias 101
not forget college every high school
of course cognitive bias and the entire
course should be about all the ways we
fool ourselves don't you think that
little Sciences so I've tweeted this to
science the only point of the scientific
method is to make sure you are not
fooled into thinking that something is
true that is not or thinking that
something is not true that is that is
the only point of it and therefore the
scientific method be anything you invent
just take better notes take a chart
recorder be more awake next time you
take the data bring a friend to observe
it with you whatever it takes to
minimize the chances that you will
misinterpret what you're looking at so
that you don't think something is true
that is not or think something is not
true that is do whatever it takes to
support that that mission statement
that's what the scientific method is and
that's what we do as scientists and
that's why when you bring all of these
things that people do so it's the
astrology and the crystal healers and me
and who the the the the quote
therapeutic touch people that's real
that's real you don't even understand
I'm an intuitive e goes on and on and on
and on yeah and these are the things
that fail in the double-blind science NE
why do you do double-blind so you don't
fool yourself into thinking something is
true that's why you do double-blind and
if you don't and you want something to
be true even if you even if you're
surprised by something that might have
been true that you were against still
you need someone else to check it okay
and and you only get an emergent
scientific truth when you have agreement
among different peoples experiments and
so even if you get a result that you're
happy with it is not yet a scientific
truth until you can confirm it by other
people who have no investment in you who
don't care about in fact we're trying to
show that you're wrong this is what made
in Stine so great cuz no one believed
his relativity and they kept devising
ever more accurate experiments to show
he was wrong and it end up showing that
he was right by ever higher
do you think that we're doing ourselves
a disservice by not teaching people how
the mind works how confirmation bias
works and and things in school I'm
working on this what are you in a few
years I'm gonna have something let's
discuss it because I think either took
me a long week it has to include an
entire course on cognitive bias yes if
we are gonna emerge as adults no longer
susceptible to charlatans yes okay who
are either well-meaning and just
misguided or who are explicitly
exploiting your ignorance and that's a
major factor in our culture a major
factor when it comes to politicians the
driver factor when it comes to bosses
it's a major factor when it comes to how
you choose what you do for a living and
human interaction with nature itself
yeah I mean we are constantly trying to
manipulate and control other people's
biases behaviors the way they think the
way they act and we're very vulnerable
in some senses because this is not
something that's taught to us at an
early age you know and I think that we
it takes a long time to figure it out on
your own
and I've often thought like men why
wasn't I explained this when I was young
yeah because the curriculum was it
wasn't thinking about that yeah but
we're just giving people facts instead
of teaching them how thinking that your
mind is this vessel into which you pour
information and know where and at no
time are we trained how to turn a fact
into knowledge knowledge into wisdom and
wisdom into insight I think that full
sequence needs to be in there in the
academic system K through 12 13 through
16 13 14 yeah College it's got to be in
there somewhere without it you're just
this vessel of facts even if you and
even the people we call smart in class
these are people get a's on everything
and they know everything but do they
have the deepest insight are they do
they really understand what it is that
they're putting back
on the test I don't think all of them do
I think they have good short-term memory
some of them and they do well on the
exams because of that fact so they're
good at acquiring data and and
maintaining and acquiring information
and then bringing it back on command not
all summer aren't deep thinkers and I
want to take that away from them all I'm
saying is that the curriculum I think
needs these other dimensions of of
survival really so that's what it is
it's survival in a world and when a
scientist says this is true you can ask
well why do you think that's true
exercise some healthy skepticism I don't
have a problem with that
say because of look at this evidence do
you know how to read evidence by the way
and look at this evidence pyramid and
this is why we conclude overwhelmingly
that this is going to happen in our
future
ah iq out of you pointy-headed
scientists what do you know
by the way give me my cell phone so I
can call my grandmother okay well I use
GPS satellites to know when to make a
left turn right right I'm gonna call my
astrologist to tell these scientists
don't dig out their head up their ass
right yeah well I think also would be
really beneficial to teach people how to
manage perspective and how to look at
you know look at life in a way that's
gonna be beneficial to you but we're not
really giving more to manage the mind
like philosophy and philosophy classes a
sure but but even philosophy not all
philosophy has very the philosophy of
life you know just how to think about
decision making yeah and the causes and
effects and consequences there's not
enough of that either no I mean they're
relying on that to happen at home but
not all homes are intact right in fact
perhaps most are broken homes or
separated homes and so I I think the
school systems school needs to be
rethought and I'm trying to think that
through a few more years well anytime
you talk about alternative schooling
people look at you like you're some sort
of a hippie freak who wants your kids to
eat granola right their own spring water
that's what they think of when you say
alternative schooling right right I'll
train them at home
and good luck it's as soon as you say
Holmes going oh you're a religious nut I
mean that's that's immediately the ocean
fastest-growing sector of the
homeschooling center they don't want you
cloud your head with all that evolution
talk right right right
do you ever talk to that Ken Ham guy
have you ever sat down with that guy
know what Bill Nye has I mean Bill Nye
debated him I mean I can't debate people
it's not what I do you just can't do it
I just can't do it it's not what I do
I'm an educator and I want to educate
you so you might think for yourself but
tonight go away that's it to debate
someone implies that whoever whoever is
most convincing is correct right
that's not how knowledge works right
it's just so much charisma involved yeah
it's not how know whatever charisma
level I have or not have I don't want to
hinge what is true on that fact right
all right so I'm an educator I will I
will teach you the causes and effects of
what science is knowing what science is
and how and why it works which is why
it's critical that you continue to
criticize science fiction movies it's
very important don't you back off now we
need use a lot of people that wouldn't
know that that Chinese space station is
known and that her hair would be moving
all over the place there would be
everywhere yeah well my favorite one is
remember when he's at the end of a
tether and she's drawn to save him but
she doesn't have an oxygen to do it so
he lets go of the tether and that way
she can't save him before she can save
herself right and he and then he flies
away it's like no they're like floating
in space yeah let's go to the tether it
just stays there in his hand yeah
doesn't he would be right there he would
be right there nothing let's go nothing
happens wooden be like a bungee cord now
if he if she was swinging him in circles
and he like oh yeah he'd fly off at a
tangent but that's not what was
happening right and nor were they
rotating I would check the what they
were relative to earth below there was
not what was going on so then you know
she could have just give it a slight tug
and then he would have drifted towards
her that could have even been a little
romance it's a little baby tug we talked
would do it they would slowly drop the
helmets would hit you know and then the
helmets break and then there'd be
freezing it up instantly right you'd
suffocate that too and then freeze to
death
right what movie nailed that there was
one movie with the space you know they
overdid it
well there was people want you to like
explode in space yeah no no I mean well
you want you to free solid to instantly
yeah right no just know there's and even
in was an Armageddon where the Sun rose
over this over the over the comet and he
didn't have his visor down and he was
blinded by the Sun it's like the same
Sun in our daytime sky the atmosphere
doesn't protect you in any of the
Earth's atmosphere it takes out you know
the few percent that's right oh yeah a
few percent boy in the middle say just
one day light at the top of the sky a
few percent now he'll get more UV he'll
get more UV that's important get a
little brown yep but yep death in space
is nowhere near as spectacular as movies
would have you think yeah they make it
seem like if you take that a helmet off
you just have immediately freeze up yeah
yeah no no I mean you can go into very
what happens is there's nothing making
you cold other than you radiating heat
from your skin so you only get as cold
as quickly as you can radiate away heat
that's all
so take quite a while oh yeah no no air
so you'd suffocate quicker yeah you'd
suffocate oh yeah you some Kate long
before you saw anything anything like
that happen so so just think about
there's nothing touching you that's
making you cold it has to wait for you
to radiate away mmm that's what's
happening okay and so that so yeah
you'll feel very cold very quickly but
you're not gonna die from that fast
now when Stephen Hawking oh by the way
you also have dissolved gases in your
body which will try to come because in
in in the vacuum of space you don't have
the air pressure tamping down the
dissolve gas so you take away the air
pressure then the dissolved gases will
begin to bubble out of your blood no
there's the same problem with when you
have the bends ah when you come up from
low altitude right and you go to lesser
pressure around you employees again nice
so you want to do that slowly so that
it's a very slow thing but the hazards
of but why would you
be butt naked in space I'm you're gonna
have a space suit on well I just want to
prove to everybody that you do it so
like well they did in 2001 a Space
Odyssey they basically did it right the
guy without his helmet went through the
airlock I just held his breath oh okay
yeah yeah that's what we do oh well that
that's way more reasonable well because
it was a reasonable movie there was a
real adviser Stanley Kubrick well he was
a really interesting guy - cuz he was a
mathematician Stanley I didn't know that
about but I knew he cared about yeah
that level of detail
he's to do complex math and for fun so
there's a there's a there's a failed bit
of physics and 2001 you want oh yeah
yeah one day I'll talk about my pencil
it's nutso huh then the monolith which
was it no no so remember when he's he's
on one of the the moon crafts and he's
orbiting the moon and they give him food
alright and there's a tray of nasty food
obviously it's like astronaut food
remember this is 1968 so everything here
is a is a visual taste of the future so
he has another packet where he extends a
straw from that plastic packet okay oh
there he is
excellent and you're getting the good
photo you're good your boy is good right
here okay yeah there is
so he sucks up the straw right and this
isn't zero-g so stuff is floating but he
sucked up the straw then he goes to
another straw and the liquid and the
straw goes back down that's gravity yeah
he totally fucked them no so that one
obviously he can't get everything right
but it's fun to notice the things he
couldn't get right we didn't think to
get right so to me it's a celebration
here's another one okay the rotation
rate of the space station I calculated
that and I did calculated what g-force
would you have on the outer perimeter of
the space station in 2001 and I did the
math and I forgot the exact numbers
something like between 2 and 3 G's oh
and I said it's why would you do that
that's stupid you wouldn't do that and I
realized if they rotated it at the rate
that would give you 1 G you'd be way too
slow to make an interesting scene
as I gave it to him as I'll give you 3
G's because the Strauss waltz as the
thing turns and the space shuttle that's
approaching it matches its rotation rate
with the opening in the center of the
space station this whole ballet this
entire ballet wow that's cool again
happens at a stately but real pace ok
but that pace gives them a 3G 3GS of
gravity so it's 3x the correct pace the
correct pace maybe been two and a half
but I forgot the number but it's it's
multiples too high so days much soon as
I let him do it it's it's so I'm not
gonna so I'm fine that's that's artistic
license that's Mark Twain II and license
where he says first get your facts
straight then distort them at your
leisure
that is what I'm holding artists to so
now when you're looking at a space
station like they're in zero-gravity
when they're in space station know they
are in 1g on the edge of the space
station on the edge yeah on the turning
edge yeah that's a lot I mean that thing
so our space yes
oh so it's zero-g yes right now it's but
it is possibie cuz it is in freefall
towards Earth so it's constantly in
freefall but it's just going around the
yeah it's in freefall towards Earth but
it's going sideways so fast that the
amount that it has fallen equals
precisely the spin of the curvature of
the earth uh-huh is that more proof that
the earth is round if you've had physics
101 yes but is it possible sorry
gravity yeah in a space station only if
you rotate it along zero 10 it's not
gravity it's a similar system but
according to Einstein they're
indistinguishable from one another so
you can do it so there it is possible to
do something where you can send people
into deep space and generate gravity
through some station or two at least two
ways one of them you just rotate it and
all the good sci-fi movies have rotating
sections of a Space Station right right
and there's some that have rotating
opposite ways so that they can submit up
against one another right and so there's
some clever ideas out there with space
stations of the future
for long voyages we use I had commander
Hadfield on the podcast cool came back
from space and was talking about the
excruciating difficulty he had
readjusting to gravity after being in a
zero gravity environment for so long
he's just showing off because he's like
setting records for be sure yeah I
couldn't I couldn't handle life with you
lowly earth people he was talking about
his body like it took like over a year
before his bone density came back and
well this is it partly addressed in the
film the the the Martian kid he's born
on Mars comes to earth which ones going
on Mars yeah the kid born on Mars I'm
get you gotta research this like now
yeah what's the name of the movie its
recent yeah yeah oh this the space
between us oh what the hell is that you
got to get out more dude I do yeah
that's so this is a Martian colony where
the first community who's what movies
this this came out of come on months ago
really oh my gosh oh yeah
ma'am so there's this 19 so that's the
Martian colony and one of the female
astronauts they send that one there
happens to be they learn is pregnant and
they can't bring her back and so they
she gives birth on Mars the first person
who was ever born on Mars and then they
then they keep it a secret and then he
comes back as a teenager that falls in
love see there's the fetus so so anyhow
he has a hard time on earth because his
heart developed in Martian gravity which
is only 38% earth gravity oh wow then on
earth he just couldn't they had to you
know figure out what to do with him Wow
yeah that's on Mars the kid was born on
Mars okay yeah don't spoil alert me
Jamie yeah that's why yeah yeah yeah
yeah so well we're generating gravity
yes so one way to rotate it up another
way is if you're headed somewhere right
I just have a huge fuel tank and just
always run your rockets ah solar force
is always a g-force if you should sell
accelerated 1g right towards a
destination then you'll always have
feeling gravity
and you'll get there awesomely fast but
you would have to have so much fuel or
on something well you knew you filling
stations on route this sort of the end
if you do this you accelerate 1g halfway
there then you turn the spaceship around
then you decelerate at 1g for the other
half of the trip so that when you get
there you're not whizzing past it in a
flyby okay then we have 1g the whole
trip that's how you would do that Wow so
the momentum when you'd precisely do
somebody there at 1g oh my gosh you hit
near the speed of light very quickly
whoa oh my I mean I forgot what is it in
a I have to calculate it but it's it's
the acceleration of gravity if you
actually move that fast that's that's
head snapping now would they have to
have some sort of a crazy propulsion
system in order to do something along
those lines
how fast were 1g get you there yes yes
so Wow 1g would take 1 plus the distance
in lightyears Proxima Centauri 4.2
light-years for example would take 5
point 2 years so the distance in
lightyears plus a year so that's that's
that's so that gets you basically 20-25
percent the speed of light what happens
if you just run into stuff on the way
like there's a lot of stuff out there
right yes it's not a giant issue and
getting to Mars well the space is
actually quite empty but if you do hit
something that's the end of everything
so it's it's a low risk high consequence
thing then you gotta you got to put in
play know how much of a risk is the
space junk that we've left in the
environment we were started well
freaking out about how many S's are up
there I guess so there's countless
thousands of bits of space junk from
chips of paint that fell off of the base
so bolts and nails and retro right and
boosters yeah that's all it's all up
there and I'm and I'm wondering whether
we haven't been visited by aliens yet
because I saw the space junk orbiting
Earth and said forget that I'm gonna
submit it to some other planet
I'm gonna risk my life since the
short-sighted approach to space travel
so the NASA orbital debris office
website you can actually see the debris
that NASA's tracking basic almost in
real time it's
it'll show serious and it's it's like a
beehive around the earth so you got yeah
there it is okay that's the debris
around the earth that asteroid that NASA
tracks and there's a failed Japanese
experiment to try to in that outer ring
that you see that's the the altitude of
geosynchronous satellites and that inner
enough that should be there should be a
video of that just fine go to the bottom
right go to bottom right right there
click on that play that video it's not a
video why isn't that a video I'm sure
there is a video somewhere yeah there's
a video on that site so you can just see
the movement of these pieces and it's so
launch windows have to know when to not
hit stuff so so when you've launched
whoo it's not just is everything aligned
right is what K will you successfully
get past the debris and there was a
Japanese they had an experiment to try
to capture it with nets there was a
recent mole yeah so didn't work yeah so
the problem is the low orbit stuff will
eventually fall in and burn up the
higher court except will never go away
there's nothing to destroy it and so
they can't capture that stuff well you
need a very clever this this stuff is
moving 18,000 miles an hour so what's
your net what just what are you doing go
higher res on that sure if there's a
high no there's a high rest oh god
that's 1080 no it's not from NASA's
YouTube there okay somebody else but
that's that's the kind so all that's
that's debris that you're looking at
there so anyway yeah so your concern for
debris is well placed and we may we may
be putting so much debris in space that
we will close ourselves off from space
travel because of the dangers it would
take to get through our own garbage heap
[Music]
that's so crazy
and this was all started in the 1940s
1950s like when did they start shooting
stuff up there oh no 1950s Sputnik oh
yeah
1957 that was the first satellite first
anything yeah first anything in orbit Oh
God and in that short amount of time no
that's crazy
yeah it's like it's like a dumpster 60
years planetary don't ruin the whole
thing ruin the whole thing they've had
it for billions of years 60 years they
filled it up with junk that's oh my god
that's terrifying it yeah that's going
around the earth oh my god all of that
oh my god has anybody ever hit anything
while trying to do something alright
well so what exacerbates it is remember
in China
when was this 19 2004 2003 China
destroyed one of its own satellites yeah
what was that about orbit I remember
someone yeah yeah and they basically did
a kinetic kill on a satellite so kinetic
kill for those who don't know is you
don't need explosives
if the speed of the projectile and it's
kinetic energy is higher than the energy
that would be in the explosive shell
itself so it knows a fascinating
calculation to make so so here it is so
I have this delivery system with a
warhead and I put some bomb device in
the warhead and you can calculate how
much energy that is then I send it and
it hits and it blow something up but
suppose I send this thing really really
fast really really really fast I can
calculate how much kinetic energy this
thing has there will be a point where I
give it so much kinetic energy the
kinetic energy is greater than the
chemical energy of the conventional
explosive that I put in the warhead ah
like shoemaker-levy well that's for
example yeah no no I give you a
terrestrial example okay it's so it's
what we call a high-speed collision this
is more than you bargained for in this
in our time together but I will tell you
nowaday ready perfect the argument
for the longest time that the craters on
the moon were calderas from volcanoes
and not asteroid impacts the geologists
argue strenuously these can't be
asteroid impacts they've got to be
calderas these thousand craters on the
moon oh why because every one is a
perfect circle and if asteroids are
coming from space they would come from
all angles and if you come in at a
shallow angle you get an oval and even
shallower be more oval so you'd have a
whole range of circles and ovals and
ellipses and you don't see that they
must be calderas it was not sitting out
there it's a volcano just create a
volcanic crater that's a Yellowstone
yeah yeah yeah it's a vault it's a
volcanic crater that's all and it's a
little more poetic a caldera yeah but
it's a it's a crater left by a volcano
that has exploded like the boom was so
big the mountains gone and now it's just
a big hole
or at the top of the mountain there's a
crater at the top of the mountain like
crater lake that's that's a round hole
in the top of a mountain was that once a
volcano I don't know but it's a hole
okay so in the 1970s we were able to do
calculations with high speed computers
with good computers and what we found
was if the object is moving faster if
the kinetic energy of the object is
higher then the energy that's holding
the thing together ooh okay
so what's holding together a rock the
chemical connections of the silicon and
the oxygen and everything that they are
an all everything is making the rock
that's holding it together you can
calculate how much energy is holding it
together and if it's going 45,000 write
that write down that number now I send
in the asteroid with a kinetic energy
higher than the energy that's holding it
together on impact it explodes oh
because all that energy goes back into
the rock because
thing isn't moving anymore we did the
kinetic energy go it digs a crater
number one by virtue of putting all that
energy back into the stone and that
explodes it so on impact even at an
angle it is a singular point explosion
and that's why every single crater is a
perfect circle we call that a high-speed
impact where the speed is greater the
energy of the speed is greater than the
energy that's holding it together now
you have experience in this okay have
you ever thrown us do this next oh you
think we're in California sorry
snowballs snowballs take us snow cut a
big bear they have to take a smoke there
and face oh it's a barn wall and throw
the snowball at it and it'll make a
little circular mark on it now change
your angle to the wall and throw the
snowball again it'll still make a a
small round mark and it'll keep doing it
you know why because the speed with
which you threw the snowball that energy
is greater than the energy that's
holding the snowball together because
hardly energy hardly any energy is
holding a snowball together it's just
loosely packed snow so when you do it
against the wall you see the snowball
completely disappear in a in a mini
snowball explosion if you will so this
works for any comparison of projectile
speed and what we call the binding
energy of the object itself this is why
the intercontinental ballistic missiles
never carried conventional warheads
because their speed coming out of this
of space because they leave the
atmosphere go from one continent to the
other and then they fall out of the sky
that speed gives them more kinetic
energy than any conventional warhead
would have had whoa but then we figured
out how to make small nuclear warheads
the nukes now you talk and energy the
kinetic energy of the ICBM is not higher
than the nuclear warhead that we now put
in that's why all ICBMs are nukes Wow
the v2 rocket basically didn't need an
explosive warhead in its tip they came
out of the sky going five miles per
second there was none of this that
implies you're hearing the thing the it
is coming in supersonically Wow you're
sitting there at a cocktail table on a
block and then the block is gone is
obliterated in the next instant you
didn't even know you didn't even know to
look up Wow
so that's the end and they add an
explosive anyway but they'd they
probably didn't need to now to go back
to shoemaker-levy that was a comment
that slammed into jupiter no good
Jupiter is a gas giant you've always
been confused as to what that means Oh
most of its mass is in the form of gas
most of its oh yes 97% of its so when
shoemaker-levy slammed into Jupiter and
missed the gaseous atmosphere was like
hitting a brick wall whoa
that's how fast it was moving that's why
the explosion was exactly so it's slow
all of its kinetic energy that it had
got put back into the object itself
because it slowed down very quickly
relative to its speed I'm Ella t'v to
thee so so here's this comet I forgot
how big shoemaker-levy was so now it
goes into the atmosphere and you say oh
isn't it just clouds and it can a watch
how fast it's going you can ask the
question over how much distance will it
plow through its own mass worth of gas
well that's it that's a question right
right that's that it has to plow that
much mass out of the way that's an
important resistive force right so how
much atmosphere that's a lot of
atmosphere because it's gas and this
thing is solid
however the thing is going what 15 20
miles per second it's falling into
Jupiter at 20 Mont whatever the speed
was if you don't at 20 miles per second
you will cover that much atmosphere in a
fraction of a second so in a fraction of
a second you go from 20 miles per second
to zero when we're a tiny fraction of
that speed all that energy has to go
somewhere it goes back into the system
it's a comet made of ice ice is not held
together very easily the whole thing
explodes on impact that was another
terrifying statistic that I read about
the impact that hit the Yucatan and
killed the dinosaurs that how deep it
had gone into the Earth's surface within
the first second oh oh yeah these are
these are numbers that are staggering
once you calculate what they are and
like I said if you come in fast enough
Earth's atmosphere is a brick might as
well be a brick wall to you and by the
way you go 60 miles an hour down the
road roll down the window just stick
your hand out the window you have to use
muscle energy to not have your and your
hand blown backwards against 60 miles an
hour yeah of air against your open palm
just try that next time see what kind of
energy that requires hmm and that's 60
miles an hour
now imagine five miles per second ten
miles per second 20 miles per second you
toast how deep did the asteroid that hit
and killed the dinosaurs how deep that
thing going or so what was that that was
a 150 mile diameter crater or something
like that I forgot the exact numbers so
these are there's a relationship between
the depth of a crater and the diameter
and the mass of the thing so no-goes
miles down I mean it's it's miles oh
yeah oh yeah well let me think an earth
rang for like a million years what
happens is let me pull take that back I
don't know if it's miles it's I think it
was when I had read I don't remember the
exact statistic what excuse me no no
it's gotta go miles now because the
thing is miles is mile is the the the
asteroid itself was the size of Mount
Everest
so the asteroid sauce is like five miles
across so it's deep no you just don't
mess with this by the way the crater in
Arizona called meteor crater for obvious
reasons that can sink a 60-story
building and it's not even a mile across
and now we're talking about a crater
more than a hundred miles across that
took out the dinosaurs that famous one
in Arizona I think a 60-story building
if you if you put dirt up to the rim of
that crater you can bury a 60 dad an
instance where you this is your whole
calculation about explosions and about
the amount of energy that
they were looking for the raw materials
that caused that crater thought that
they could mine it correct they first
thought is volcanic and the geologists
thought it was volcanic again and the
but one geologist in particular Eugene
shoemaker who was in line to be on one
of the lunar missions and then he had
like a heart murmur and then they sent
Jack Schmitt to in his stead who was
also geologist turned US senator from
Arizona
where was he senator from I forgot but
can you looked at Jack Schmitt where his
senator from forgive me forget because I
knew I'm friends with him so I should
have known that NASA Jack Schmitt schm
ITT it's not there's no D in it so Bubba
desk oh yes I was right yes in New
Mexico I said Arizona so New Mexico so
he but anyhow he's saying no this is
this is an impact crater and well if
it's an impact crater where is the
meteorite it must be buried down here
and so there were miners they were there
were there iron miners who bought the
the land so they can get this huge
meteor that they were sure was just
sitting down there that they could mine
for its natural resource they could not
find the meteor that's because it hit at
high speed velocity it was a high
velocity impact which means as collision
energy was greater than the binding
energy even of the iron atoms itself and
90% of that thing vaporized on impact
Wow iron more impressive even than I
remember okay the pieces that's that's
nice low angle shot so you get the
shadows of the rim
that's an Arizona where where narrow
it's near Winslow Arizona where would
that be near someone wanted to fly in to
see that oh here it is if you go to the
Grand Canyon then you drive to this and
it's a couple hours two hours ok there's
me you're the man who's coming up and
where's the Grand Canyon there's meteor
crater
and Grand Canyon because it which is
also in Arizona Flashdance reports you
can drive that see that Grand Canyon to
your crater through Flagstaff yeah so
you're not gonna fly that you just drive
it and it has Yelp reviews it's a good
look
why does it have all the stars look I
know it should have every goddamn star
only three point nine so this hole was
this this meteor crater was dug in like
you know a few seconds this crater was
made yeah just and how many years ago is
that fifty thousand years ago that's not
oximetry nothing Wow
there's probably some form of human
living here then oh yeah yeah early
humans but I mean I don't know if they
were in North America I say 40,000 is
the most recent right yeah it was when
they crossed the Bering Strait yeah
that's one that they would have just
arrived man no that's cool I'm going
back
oh yeah multiple times oh yeah
is it freaky what's freaky about it is
you walk up to it you can't see it
because the rim of the crater it just
looks like a ridge a Ridgeline the rim
is raised above the plane of the area
right because when you press down it
raises it up a bit so you just walk up
to it and then you come up to the ledge
and in fact and you realize what it is
this is a nearly a mile diameter hole in
the ground
oh yeah it's a stunning it's a stunning
encounter with the forces of nature and
the fact that there's so many of those
particles just floating around out there
lamb right no that's that how big was
that when you think oh yeah that was
about
about 20 yards across something that's
nothing it's nothing that's nothing
that's it 20 yards yeah maybe
between 20 and 40 yards 20 yards is the
sizes yeah that's right from that garage
to that front door kind of stards yeah
yeah wow that's crazy right
that's nothing and that's the kind of
thing that can get close enough that you
don't even see and then it's too late
and that's not gonna make us extinct but
it'll make a very bad day for a city
yeah okay
oh yeah city's done and most likely the
power grids jacked for a long time too
right now no you have ten more minutes
okay so I had to get the Stephen
Hawking's quote out for you Stephen
Hawking's was talking about the the
possibility of alien life discovering us
and that it would be a terrible terrible
thing if it did happen if you look at
what has happened to other primitive
life-forms and we discovered them
primitive cultures and we've discovered
them do you share that same opinion that
if something did find us I don't have a
strong opinion on that question but I
have an analysis of his comment okay he
is worried about the possibility of
aliens enslaving us Oh based on the
reality that we've done that to
ourselves
yes just think about that his fear of
aliens derives not from actual knowledge
of aliens but from an actual knowledge
of ourselves anytime a more advanced
civilization has come upon all let's if
a technologically advanced civil for the
less advanced civilization and that
happened in North America South America
North America with with Europeans South
America the Spanish Australia with with
the Brits never voted well for the less
technologically advanced civilization
his factual knowledge of that leads him
to suspect that aliens would be exactly
the same
and I I'm not that skeptical I don't
think all life forms in the universe
have the basal primal violent attitudes
that we do as a species I've not been
given reason to think so
but don't you believe that things
advance because of competition and
competition forces things to be fairly
ruthless it has been argued that if you
colonize if you're a civilization that
colonizes the galaxy that it's a
self-limiting exercise why because here
you go you ready we start here on earth
is you and me boy all right
and you take that planet I take this
planet and now we have both have
offspring that are just like us and we
want more planets all right we reach a
point where expansion is not possible
because we are whirring with ourselves
to gain the territory that each other
has obtained so it has been argued
sociologically that the very act of
wanting to colonize is self limiting
against successful colonization of the
galaxy because the colonize the galaxy
has to be done in an organized way all
right you take this sector I take this
sector but if I want territory and I
want it now and my kids want it now I
want that territory not this other one
in fact I want at all that kind of
attitude breeds violence it breeds war
in intra galactic war so it may be that
the very kind of civilization that could
peacefully colonize a galaxy is not the
kind of civilization that would colonize
the galaxy at all that's heavy very
heavy what about the idea that he
advanced that's my first comment ok
another one he's got he made another
comment about we should be a
multi-planet species attacked ourselves
against an asteroid rendering one
distinct it makes a good headline and it
sounds like it makes sense but I'm not
I'm not there with it
yeah of course
back up of course let's be a
multi-planet species fine but but I
would do it for different reasons I'd do
because it's cool not because I want to
protect human human species from
extinction no that wouldn't be the
reason to do it can I tell you why
please list every reason why you think
we go extinct when we trash earth
another when we can't live off of it
anymore an asteroid is coming there's
some nanobot gone astray okay pandemic
and virus a pandemic okay so it seems to
me that if we want to be a multi-planet
species Mars would be the one because
it's a 24-hour day
it's got seasons we would have the
terraform at first but then we all move
their duty ship a billion people there
here's Mike where's my point
whatever it takes to terraform Mars and
ship a billion people there it's got to
be easier to deflect the asteroid
whatever it takes
to terraform Mars to turn it into earth
if you had the power of geoengineering
to do that then you have the power
geoengineering to turn earth back into
earth but there are nation aliyah things
that we miss right because of the way
that so so you so you say okay whatever
it takes to Geoengineer mars and ship a
billion people there it's got to be
easier to create a perfect viral serum
that makes us immune to all possible
disease it's got to be easier whatever
that takes but isn't it possible that
there's some asteroids that we just will
not see until it's too late
then you put up whatever that takes
whatever but they're just kind of out
the ship a billion people they're a bit
of course why wouldn't it be we have
said what do you put ten people there
what you wanted not split your species
right okay and if an asteroid is coming
that you can't deflect which would
surprise me if you could ship a billion
people to Mars you just let them all die
what what is that what's your you plan
to you don't let all the earth people
die in the Mars people survive just
you can save this we don't save
everybody I'm not buying into the
premise this cable-car ology premise
that you have to save one to not save
the other and yeah you know you'll
cable-car ology I see the cable car you
you know someone's in the tracks you let
him go you let him go if you steer it
out of the way but then you actively
kill two people instead of passively
killing one person from what do you do
I'm not buying into that premise for
this question I'm simply saying that
whatever it takes
it's got to be easier to put up some
kind of net that finds any asteroid that
could possibly harm us and zaps them out
of the sky there's got to be easy is the
last question is it is it possible that
the reason why we are never visited by
extraterrestrials is because the way
civilization is it because the way
stations they have visited they visited
during comic-con the costumes weren't as
good as ours okay three three three
they've observed us and judged there's
no sign of intelligent life on earth
okay but is there another possibility
that civilizations don't ever get to
travel like that because what happens is
as they advanced and as their technology
advances they become instead of a
biological entity seeking to spread its
genetics throughout the universe they
become some sort of symbiotic artificial
life that as they create as they advance
their technology and as they continue to
innovate they reach a limitation in
biology and that eventually create
artificial life that sees no desire
whatsoever to travel oh interesting so I
would say that's a great philosophical
question I would say that the day we
create AI if the AI is everything we are
except more and not emotional then I
fully have an urge to explore maybe
otherwise is that it's not us well
wouldn't it create those wars like in
Monsters Inc and start going dimension
to dimension instead of fucking around
with Jets
why hammer Kil'jaeden right right right
right yeah they figure out the fourth
dimension yeah wouldn't that be the best
way to do things and then they'd figure
it out and then they would figure out a
way to travel better than any way we
could but if the fact that we want to
travel and we're creating versions of
ourselves called AI I wouldn't want to
travel but why would it be curious if
biological it then it's not well if we
create every neurosynaptic
map right of our brain into silicon into
a computer and recreate our
consciousness as humans the human brain
but wouldn't human version of AI would
be like an infinite version of AI hey I
could create itself the current why
would it limit itself to all of our
emotions and sexual desires and jealousy
and all the ridiculous things that are
holding us back
it could sure sure no I'm not as
fearsome of AI as others are I you know
we're not gonna make an AI looking human
being because the human form is not the
best or ideal form for anything did you
see ex machina yes you didn't love it no
it was good I loved it okay well that's
the first thing you for sure for sure
right yeah for sure but I'm just saying
it's one of my favorite movies I want to
marry the movie it's just awesome movie
so then marriage would no longer be
about sex or just be about reproduction
because just go to your room with your
sexy bar I'm hoping that that's one of
the first things that people figure out
they shouldn't do anymore
once they get smart enough to
symbiotically attach themselves to
artificial intelligence I was watching
what was it family feud one of the
questions was if you're we asked 100
married women if you could have a second
husband for only one purpose what would
it be something like 70% of it said just
for sex whoa damn it for only one
purpose just just for getting stuffed
just so that's a fucking wake-up call
for a lot of
send on that Neil deGrasse Tyson
astrophysics for people in a hurry in a
horror out in May thank you so much sir
your your love you man I love you too
brother
thanks so much throw them in here and
thank you anytime open invitation Carla
middle of the night come down here we'll
open it and you gotta wake him up he'll
do it he's down he loves you too
alright thank you sir appreciate
[Music]
[Applause]